---
title: "Bienvenue à Paris !"
date: '2018-05-27T17:00:00+02:00'
slug: paris
categories: ['France']
---

I have just moved to Paris ahead of a six-month internship.
It is my first time even visiting the city, so here are some initial impressions.
As any Français(e) will keenly remind you: 'Paris is not France', so I hope to venture outside *la périphérique* as soon as I have the opportunity.

### Getting around

In Paris, traffic signals are suggestions rather than orders.
A red man at a pedestrian crossing means "cross at your peril" whilst a green man means exactly the same.
Approximately 100% of roads and cycle paths are one-way, so route finding involves a fair bit of improvisation.
The best places to observe Parisian drivers in their natural habitat are the six+ lane roundabouts that are the Place de la Concorde and Arc de Triomphe.

If you are hard as nails like me then it is actually quite efficient to cycle around the city, using Mobikes, Ofo or Vélibs.
Check that each wheel approximates a circle before setting off.
Bonus points if you hire a vélo that is covered in algae, having clearly just been fished out of the Seine.

### La Tour Eiffel

This replica of the Blackpool Tower appears bigger the closer you get.
On our visit, the lift to the very top was closed, but it was still possible to go to the *deuxième étage*.
It is slightly cheaper to take the stairs than to take the lift, so up the 669 steps we went.
My mum reckoned the structure needed dusting and a lick of paint.

### Les Catacombes de Paris

We headed to the catacombs and found the place closed because all of the workers were on strike.
[C'est la grève !](http://www.cestlagreve.fr)

### Musée du Louvre

The famous art museum opens onto the Jardin des Tuileries, a big park.
I tried on a few souvenir hats from the street sellers here but none of them were big enough.

### Les Champs-Elysées

During the 364 days between each final stage of le Tour de France, les Champs-Elysées become like a cross between The Mall and Oxford Street.
I couldn't find any hats that fit my head here, either.

### Les terrasses

French beer comes in small, medium and still-not-quite-as-much-as-a-pint.
Prices on *les terrasses* are about what you'd pay at home, multiplied by ten.
If you pick your seat strategically enough, you can watch *other* people get wet when it starts to rain.
We weren't clever enough to avoid getting caught in a hailstorm on the first day, however.

### Mon appartement

Based in the trendy Madeleine/Opéra district, my local shops are the *Galeries Lafayette* and *Printemps*.
These historic high-end department stores are the only places I have found so far with hats that fit me, but at €250 a go, I haven't splurged yet.

On the inside, Parisian apartment blocks somewhat resemble Scottish tenements, but they have cleverly found space in the stairwells for tiny lifts. I'm on the fourth floor in a flat that is very pink.

### La capitale

Paris is magnificent.
Everything is just on such a grand scale.
